Add Bundler 2.4 blog post and release notes (#978)
rubygems/bundler-site: source/blog/2022-12-25-rust-gem-skeleton.html.markdown

---
title: "Generate gem skeleton with Rust extension"
date: 2022-12-25 20:00 UTC
tags:
author: Josef Šimánek

> author_url: https://github.com/simi/

Reviewer: One without the trailing slash looks more canonical to us:
```suggestion
author_url: https://github.com/simi
```

Officially it all started when [YJIT](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/blob/d5635dfe36588b04d3dd6065ab4e422f51629b11/doc/yjit/yjit.md) was [ported to Rust](https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/18481) and [Ruby codebase](https://github.com/ruby/ruby) has officially [onboarded Rust code](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/tree/master/yjit/src). This friendship matured when RubyGems [3.3.11](https://rubygems.org/gems/rubygems-update/versions/3.3.11) (with a new [*Add cargo builder for rust extensions*](https://github.com/rubygems/rubygems/pull/5175) feature) [was released](https://blog.rubygems.org/2022/04/07/3.3.11-released.html) capable of compiling Rust-based extensions during gem installation process (similar to well-known C-based gem extensions like nokogiri, pg or puma).

And now, with Bundler 2.4, `bundle gem` skeleton generator can provide all the glue you need to start using Rust inside your gems thanks to the new `--ext=rust` parameter!

## What's new?

Thanks to new parameter it is possible to generate simple Rust-based gem extension.

> *Notice I already have bundle `gem command` configured. Your output can differ. When running `bundle gem` for the first time, it will interactively ask you few questions.*

Reviewer 2: Should we recommend to update to at least `RubyGems 3.4.6` here now?

Author: Yeah! Let me update this!

    module.define_singleton_method("hello", function!(hello, 1))?;
    Ok(())
}
~~~

That is equivalent to following Ruby code, including some boilerplate code, to enable Rust extension to communicate with Ruby.

~~~ruby
module HelloRust
  def self.hello(subject)
    "Hello from Rust, #{subject}!"
  end
end
~~~

## Let's compile and run some Rust!

To be able to test this boilerplate code, you need to run `bundle install` first (to install all Ruby dependencies) followed by `bundle exec rake compile` compiling Rust code.

*Notice generated gemspec is not valid by default and running `bundle install` can break. In that case it is needed to update gemspec first and replace all TODO values with some real ones.*

~~~
$ bundle install
Fetching gem metadata from https://rubygems.org/.
Resolving dependencies...
Using rake 13.0.6
Using bundler 2.4.0
Using hello_rust 0.1.0 from source at `.`
Using minitest 5.16.3
Using rake-compiler 1.2.1
Using rb_sys 0.9.52
Bundle complete! 5 Gemfile dependencies, 6 gems now installed.
Use `bundle info [gemname]` to see where a bundled gem is installed.
~~~

At this stage, everything is ready to compile Rust code and glue it with Ruby.

> *You need to have Rust already installed on your system. See [rustup](https://rustup.rs/) for simple installation experience.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*You need to have Rust already installed on your system. See [rustup](https://rustup.rs/) for a simple installation experience.*
```

cd tmp/x86_64-linux/hello_rust/3.1.2
/usr/bin/gmake
generating target/release/libhello_rust.so (release)
cargo rustc --target-dir target --manifest-path ../../../../ext/hello_rust/Cargo.toml --lib --release -- -C linker=gcc -L native=/home/retro/.rubies/ruby-3.1.2/lib -C link-arg=-lm
    Updating crates.io index
... shortened
   Compiling magnus-macros v0.2.0
   Compiling rb-sys-build v0.9.52
   Compiling rb-sys v0.9.52
   Compiling hello_rust v0.1.0 (/home/retro/code/hello_rust/ext/hello_rust)
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 1m 03s
cd -
mkdir -p tmp/x86_64-linux/stage/lib/hello_rust
/usr/bin/gmake install target_prefix=
generating target/release/libhello_rust.so (release)
cargo rustc --target-dir target --manifest-path ../../../../ext/hello_rust/Cargo.toml --lib --release -- -C linker=gcc -L native=/home/retro/.rubies/ruby-3.1.2/lib -C link-arg=-lm
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 0.09s
installing hello_rust.so to /home/retro/code/hello_rust/lib/hello_rust
/usr/bin/install -c -m 0755 hello_rust.so /home/retro/code//hello_rust/lib/hello_rust
cp tmp/x86_64-linux/hello_rust/3.1.2/hello_rust.so tmp/x86_64-linux/stage/lib/hello_rust/hello_rust.so
~~~

> And finally, it is possible to call `hello` method defined in Rust returning string and print it to the console.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And finally, it is possible to call `hello` method defined in Rust returning a string and printing it to the console.
```

~~~
$ bundle exec ruby -rhello_rust -e 'puts HelloRust.hello("Josef")'
"Hello from Rust, Josef!"
~~~

> *Feel free to try to break this extension. For example you can try to pass different type of argument (like number or symbol). [magnus](https://github.com/matsadler/magnus) is doing great job [automatically coverting](https://github.com/matsadler/magnus#defining-methods) all those mistakes with friendly error messages.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Feel free to try to break this extension. For example you can try to pass different types of argument (like number or symbol). [magnus](https://github.com/matsadler/magnus) is doing a great job [automatically converting](https://github.com/matsadler/magnus#defining-methods) all those mistakes with friendly error messages.*
```
